- [Instructor] Now that we've seen JSP standard actions,
let's take a look at expression language of JSP.
So now we are constantly going towards the goal where we
minimize the Java code statements, and do everything
possible by means of a tag, an element or an expression.
And expression language is one which will allow you to
write simple expressions on JSP.
Now what can those expressions do for you?
Think about what you can do on a JSP.
JSPs, as I said, used for the display purposes,
the presentation purposes.
So if you want to go ahead and dynamically read the data
of JavaBean components, or maybe read the data out of
any implicit objects that you have been storing it into,
that can be quickly read and displayed on a JSP with
simple expressions.
You can also invoke public methods and go ahead and
basically evaluate and print the output of those
expressions on the JSP page.
Not only this, expression language also allows you to
perform arithmetic, addition, subtraction, multiplication,
division, modulo, or for that matter relational,
the double equal to, the not equal to, greater than,
less than, etc., and logical operations like the and or not.
Now these arithmetic operations or relational or logical
operations that you can perform in an expression language
are very useful when you collaborate with the
JavaServer Pages stack library.
We will anyway take a look at it in the video of JSTL.
However, this is just to introduce you that expression
language has a lot of capabilities than just reading
the data off your Java components.
Now as for the 2.1 specification of JSP, expression
language is unified expression language.
That is, it is the union of expression languages offered
by the JavaServer Faces technology 1.0
and JavaServer Pages technology 2.0.
Now JavaServer Faces is of course a framework which is
used to build component based user interfaces for a
web application, and it's 1.0 version is also going to
use the expression language.
So that one and the one that we use in JSP technology 2.0
have been combined, and now together they form
Unified Expression Language.
Let's take a look at the syntax.
When I say dollar and a curly pair of braces,
and inside that we have written out something,
cart.noOfItems.
What this essentially means is first of all this is
an expression on a JSP page, and this means that I'm
trying to read the number of items property
from an object called cart, and that object would be
stored in one of our predefined scopes.
It could be request, session, application, page, etc.
So this signifies that you're trying to display that
property and print it to your JSP page.
This is the alternate syntax, for as in your have a
dollar sign, and then you have a curly pair of braces.
Now instead of using this dot operator to access
the property, you are trying to actually access it
via this pair of square brackets.
The name of the property has been embedded in double quotes.
This is a way powerful syntax, and it is always preferred
because it is also going to allow you to access arrays,
array lists, maps, etc., basically your data structure.
So this is considered to be more powerful.
Now these expressions are primarily of two types,
a value expression and a method expression.
So let's say if you look at this one,
this is a value expression.
It's just trying to fetch a value and print it
to your JSP page.
And then you can also invoke methods, as we said,
in expression language, so that's a method expression.
At another level expressions could be either of the
immediate type, the ones that can get evaluated immediately
when your JSP executes.
And the syntax that we have seen so far is going to be
for an immediate expression.
But there's another kind of an expression which
is called deferred expression.
This is the one which is going to evaluate at a later
point in time somewhere in the pages lifecycle,
and this deferred expression evaluation is going to be
completely the responsibility of the underlying
technology that you're using.
For example, in case of JavaServer Faces framework
you have this pages lifecycle undergoing many phases
like component event handling or data validation,
populating the data into the bean, etc.
So that's where JSF is going to decide which of the
expressions can be deferred and executed at a later
point in time.
If that's the deferred expression that you're writing
on the page, then the syntax is going to be like this.
There's a hash, and then there's a pair of curly braces
as opposed to the dollar sign.
Now let's take a look at some examples of expressions,
the way you write it in EL on JSP.
Let's say you want to just navigate through all the data
of your Java Beans on EL, so let's take a look at
how the expressions would look like.
I'm saying dollar and within a pair of curly braces
I'm saying user.age, which means that it's trying to get
the age property of the user bean, and then it is trying
to print it to the page.
However, if you said dollar request scope dot number
of items, it means that I'm trying to fetch a property
which is called number of items, and it has to be
picked up from the request scope.
That's what this means.
So it is going to pick it up from the request scope
and display it for me on the JSP page.
And then if you say dollar and session scope dot username,
it means you are trying to get this property this time
from the session scope.
Let's take a look now at what happens for
arithmetic operations.
So you give a dollar sign, and within a pair of curly braces
you could write out any expression using any of the
arithmetic operators.
So like addition, multiplication, division, modulo, etc.
Now the thing to note here is that when you write
an expression using arithmetic operators,
it is not necessary that you use only the symbols
that we know of.
You can also use these keywords.
For example, when I want to divide, I can say div,
I can say mod instead of the modulo operator,
so on and so forth.
So there is this set of keywords that has been reserved
in EL which you can use out for writing your expressions.
Up next is the relational operations.
So how do you write an expression for relational operation?
There you go, so you have A into B, which is again
a multiplication, that's an arithmetic operation,
and then you're comparing it with 20.
Instead of the symbol, as I said, you can also use
the keyword of EQ.
If it's a not equal to, then the keyword is NE,
so on and so forth.
Let's look at another one.
If you want to say let's say a greater than 100,
or instead of that you can also put it as GT,
which actually says that it's greater than.
Instead of the less than sign, you can put the keyword LT.
Instead of less than equal to, you can put a keyword of LE.
So basically when you do relational operations or
arithmetic operations, there is this set of keywords
that you may have at your disposal if you want to feel
more comfortable writing an expression using those keywords.
Then logical operations, you have the conventional
and, or and not operators, so those are the kinds of
expressions that you can write out with expression language.
In the next video we'll take a look at how you can use
expression language on one of your pages.